manuscript/future/02-marketing.md, before:

# Marketing

Even the technically most excellent project in the world won't have much impact unless it reaches potential users. Popularity isn't a goal always, but if it's, then it's good to know how to approach marketing the project.

The purpose of marketing is to connect the dots. In this case that means connecting a potential user, or a **prospect**, of a package with the package. Ideally the prospect would become an actual user and adopt the package through a process as described in the *Where to Start Packaging* chapter. The point of marketing is to make the package available to the prospect at the right time.

## Marketing Approaches

Marketing is a creative pursuit. Given we are dealing with programming, this gives a powerful tool - **technical marketing**. Also, more traditional approaches, such as **content marketing** and **word of mouth** apply.

Given often you don't have a marketing budget to use, you have to be mindful about the approaches you use. Certain approaches allow you to reach a large amount of people at once while converting only few while others are more specific and convert better.

### Technical Marketing

The purpose of technical marketing is to use technology somehow for marketing purposes. This is where techniques like Twitter automation come in. Especially popular projects may have social media accounts of their own. Automation can be used to generate meaningful content to them. This includes announcing new releases or highlighting popular blog posts related to the project.

Sometimes the approach may mean that you have to do something indirect, such as implement a service using the technology. Assuming the service is useful, this will bring eyes to the underlying technology if the message has been carefully crafted so that it's possible to create this connection.

A series of actual runnable case studies acts as a marketing machine that brings eyes to the project. As a technical marketer, you can develop **marketing channels** and combine them in creative manners.

### Content Marketing

It's a good idea to know where the potential users spend time. If you can address these channels with relevant content while leading the eyes to your technology, you have achieved the goal of marketing.

For example, you could write guest posts for relevant blogs and make sure the posts reach the right aggregators. Another way is to produce video series around the technology to discuss its merits. The approaches can be combined and creativity is the key here as you have to stand out from the competition somehow.

### Word of Mouth

Word of mouth is the most classic way of marketing. A happy user will spread the word and convert other people to use your technology. This type of message can amplify the others as marketing is a repetition exercise. It's not enough to reach the right people once. You have to do it repeatedly to be effective.

## Conclusion

When it comes to marketing projects, first you have to decide whether you want to market it even. Sometimes popularity isn't a primary concern as it comes with its challenges. If popularity is the goal, though, then choosing smart marketing approaches can contribute towards this.

Commit message:

chore: Address marketing chapter feedback

manuscript/future/02-marketing.md, after:

# Marketing

Even the technically most excellent project in the world won't have much impact unless it reaches potential users. Popularity isn't a goal always, but if it's, then it's good to know how to approach marketing the project.

The purpose of marketing is to connect the potential user with the project. The topic is covered from the user point of view in the *Where to Start Packaging* chapter. Marketing is the exact opposite and answers the question how to make it possible for the user to find the project.

## Marketing Approaches

Marketing is a creative pursuit. Given we are dealing with programming, this gives a powerful tool - **technical marketing**. Also, more traditional approaches, such as **content marketing** and **word of mouth** apply.

Given often you don't have a marketing budget to use, you have to be mindful about the approaches you use. Certain approaches allow you to reach a large amount of people at once while converting only few. More targeted approaches reach less people but convert better.

### Technical Marketing

The purpose of technical marketing is to use technology somehow for marketing purposes. This is where techniques like Twitter automation come in. Especially popular projects may have social media accounts of their own. Automation can be used to generate meaningful content to them. This includes announcing new releases or highlighting popular blog posts related to the project.

Sometimes the approach may mean that you have to do something indirect, such as implement a service using the technology. Assuming the service is useful, this will bring eyes to the underlying technology if the message has been carefully crafted so that it's possible to create this connection.

Assuming you are developing a user interface library, it could make sense to build amazing sites using it to showcase its capabilities. These case studies bring eyes to the project and make it easier to find.

As a technical marketer, you can develop **marketing channels** and combine them in creative manners. In this case each site could be considered a channel of its own that leads to the main project. The shape of a channel doesn't matter that much. It's more about being aware of the concept. You cannot control most channels but the ones you develop yourself, you can.

Another way would be to allow the users to get started as fast as possible. Perhaps the project homepage could contain runnable examples or something that can delight the potential user as soon as possible. Often the problem is in showing the potential of the solution. It's also important because communicating effectively what your project does saves time of people as they waste less time understanding what it's about.

### Content Marketing

It's a good idea to know where the potential users spend time. These are potential marketing channels where you can be visible while leading eyes to your technology. The influence can be sometimes indirect and lead to channels you control.

**Content marketing** can be applied by writing guest posts for relevant blogs and making sure the posts reach the right aggregators, such as [Reddit](https://www.reddit.com/r/javascript/), [Echo JS](http://www.echojs.com/), or [Hashnode](https://hashnode.com/). Another way is to produce video series around the technology to discuss its merits. The approaches can be combined and creativity is the key here as you have to stand out from the competition somehow.

### Word of Mouth

Word of mouth is the most classic way of marketing. A happy user will spread the word and convert other people to use your technology. This type of message can amplify the others as marketing is a repetition exercise. It's not enough to reach the right people once. You have to do it repeatedly to be effective.

## Conclusion

When it comes to marketing projects, first you have to decide whether you want to market it even. Sometimes popularity isn't a primary concern as it comes with its challenges related to project growth as discussed in the *Longevity* chapter. If popularity is the goal, though, then choosing smart marketing approaches can contribute towards this.
