manuscript/code-quality/02-code-formatting.md, before:

# Code Formatting

The ideas of linting and formatting code overlap. Linting can capture language usage related issues while formatting can be seen as a more general idea. Consider handling line endings for example. The problem is the same regardless of the file type. On a more specific level, you may want to format source files in a particular way.

## Configuring IDEs and Editors with EditorConfig

[EditorConfig](http://editorconfig.org/) allows you to define indentation style and other whitespace settings for any file type. This way your editor can automatically choose the correct settings, which is especially handy when developers use platforms with different line endings, e.g., Mac and Windows.

Here is a typical config (*.editorconfig*) with separate rules for Markdown, JSON and YAML files:

**.editorconfig**

```ini
root = true

[*]
indent_style = tab
end_of_line = lf
charset = utf-8
trim_trailing_whitespace = true
insert_final_newline = true

[*.{json,yml,md}]
indent_style = space
indent_size = 2
```

EditorConfig is supported by popular IDEs and editors through [plugins](http://editorconfig.org/#download).

T> It's possible to force line endings through *.gitattributes* by setting `* text=auto` and `bin/* eol=lf` but EditorConfig has more options.

## Formatting JavaScript and TypeScript with Prettier

[Prettier](https://prettier.io/) is an opinionated JavaScript formatter. It has a limited number of settings and most of the code style rules are built in. Prettier removes any existing formatting from your code and prints its own version which makes code absolutely consistent.

Prettier is smarter than other tools. For example, you can restrict line length whereas tools like ESLint can only yell at you if a line is too long and you would have to reformat the code yourself. If any line exceeds the limit, Prettier reformats the whole code block:

<!-- textlint-disable -->

```js
foo(wowJs(), suchFunction(), muchParameters(), shouldReformat());
```

After the code goes through Prettier, you'll end up with the code below:

```js
foo(
  wowJs(),
  suchFunction(),
  muchParameters(),
  shouldReformat()
);
```

However, shorter statement would be printed as one line:

```js
foo('coffee', 'croissant', 'toast', 'eggs');
```

<!-- textlint-enable -->

T> Try Prettier in [an interactive playground](https://prettier.io/playground/).

This approach has many benefits:

* Minimal configuration.
* Almost no decisions to make.
* No arguing about particular rules if you’re working in a team.
* No need to learn you project’s code style for contributors.
* No need to fix style issues reported by ESLint.

Prettier has few [options](https://prettier.io/docs/en/options.html) to modify its behavior, like indentation, quotes and semicolons.

It’s a good idea to disable code style rules in your ESLint config and let Prettier deal with the code style. For example, you can use [eslint-config-prettier](https://www.npmjs.com/package/eslint-config-prettier) instead of [eslint-config-airbnb-base](https://www.npmjs.com/package/eslint-config-airbnb-base).

W> Commit your code before running this command — it will reformat all your JavaScript files.

T> To make your contributors’ life easier you can set up Prettier to format code before each commit with lint-staged. The idea is covered in the *Automation* chapter.

### Setting Up Prettier

Let’s install Prettier:

```bash
npm install prettier --save-dev
```

Add a script to your *package.json* like this:

**package.json**

```json
{
  "scripts": {
    "format:js": "prettier --write"
  }
}
```

Create a config file, *.prettierrc*:

**.prettierrc**

```json
{
  "printWidth": 100,
  "singleQuote": true,
  "trailingComma": "es5"
}
```

And finally run:

```bash
npm run format:js
```

### Setting Up Prettier as ESLint Plugin

You can also run Prettier as a [ESLint plugin](https://github.com/prettier/eslint-plugin-prettier). This way Prettier formats all files that go through ESLint and you will not need to repeat glob patterns.

Let’s install Prettier and eslint-plugin-prettier, assuming you already have ESLint configured as described in the *Linting* chapter:

```bash
npm install prettier eslint-plugin-prettier --save-dev
```

Update your *.eslintrc* like this:

**.eslintrc**

```json
{
  "plugins": ["prettier"],
  "rules": {
    "prettier/prettier": ["error", {
      "printWidth": 100,
      "singleQuote": true,
      "trailingComma": "es5"
    }]
  }
}
```

T> You can also put your Prettier config into a *.prettierrc* file, see an example above.

And finally run:

```bash
npm run lint:js
```

T> You can set up your editor to run `eslint --fix` on save and it will reformat your code every time you save a file.

## Formatting CSS with Stylelint

Stylelint can format your CSS with `--fix` switch, check the *Linting* chapter to know how to set it up.

## Formatting CSS with Prettier

Prettier can format your CSS too, see how to set it up above.

For CSS you’ll need one more script in *package.json*:

**package.json**

```json
{
  "scripts": {
    "format:css": "prettier --write"
  }
}
```

Create a config file, *.prettierrc*:

**.prettierrc**

```json
{
  "printWidth": 100
}
```

And then run it like this:

```bash
npm run format:css
```

## Code Consistency

**Code consistency** can be characterized as follows:

* Does the code look similar everywhere?
* Are the programming patterns used consistent with each other?
* Is the naming consistent?

Code formatting answers the first problem. Linting can help with the second one although it might not capture it entirely. Consistency of naming is another difficult one as it's related to **conceptual code consistency**.

For example, it could have `FooLoader` and `BarThatLoadsFoo` abstractions. Both refer to the same concept in different ways.

It's difficult, or even impossible, to detect high-level problems like this automatically. For this reason, it's important to review the code for consistency every once in a while. Sometimes you may discover something that can be turned into a linting rule to solidify a specific idea but not everything can be automated.

## Conclusion

Formatting tools complement linting well. They eliminate one source of confusion and make sure your code is formatted in a consistent manner.

You'll learn about typing in the next chapter.

T> See the *Automation* chapter to learn how to automate code formatting.

Commit message:

chore: Describe what happens when Prettier is run through ESLint

manuscript/code-quality/02-code-formatting.md, after:

# Code Formatting

The ideas of linting and formatting code overlap. Linting can capture language usage related issues while formatting can be seen as a more general idea. Consider handling line endings for example. The problem is the same regardless of the file type. On a more specific level, you may want to format source files in a particular way.

## Configuring IDEs and Editors with EditorConfig

[EditorConfig](http://editorconfig.org/) allows you to define indentation style and other whitespace settings for any file type. This way your editor can automatically choose the correct settings, which is especially handy when developers use platforms with different line endings, e.g., Mac and Windows.

Here is a typical config (*.editorconfig*) with separate rules for Markdown, JSON and YAML files:

**.editorconfig**

```ini
root = true

[*]
indent_style = tab
end_of_line = lf
charset = utf-8
trim_trailing_whitespace = true
insert_final_newline = true

[*.{json,yml,md}]
indent_style = space
indent_size = 2
```

EditorConfig is supported by popular IDEs and editors through [plugins](http://editorconfig.org/#download).

T> It's possible to force line endings through *.gitattributes* by setting `* text=auto` and `bin/* eol=lf` but EditorConfig has more options.

## Formatting JavaScript and TypeScript with Prettier

[Prettier](https://prettier.io/) is an opinionated JavaScript formatter. It has a limited number of settings and most of the code style rules are built in. Prettier removes any existing formatting from your code and prints its own version which makes code absolutely consistent.

Prettier is smarter than other tools. For example, you can restrict line length whereas tools like ESLint can only yell at you if a line is too long and you would have to reformat the code yourself. If any line exceeds the limit, Prettier reformats the whole code block:

<!-- textlint-disable -->

```js
foo(wowJs(), suchFunction(), muchParameters(), shouldReformat());
```

After the code goes through Prettier, you'll end up with the code below:

```js
foo(
  wowJs(),
  suchFunction(),
  muchParameters(),
  shouldReformat()
);
```

However, shorter statement would be printed as one line:

```js
foo('coffee', 'croissant', 'toast', 'eggs');
```

<!-- textlint-enable -->

T> Try Prettier in [an interactive playground](https://prettier.io/playground/).

This approach has many benefits:

* Minimal configuration.
* Almost no decisions to make.
* No arguing about particular rules if you’re working in a team.
* No need to learn you project’s code style for contributors.
* No need to fix style issues reported by ESLint.

Prettier has few [options](https://prettier.io/docs/en/options.html) to modify its behavior, like indentation, quotes and semicolons.

It’s a good idea to disable code style rules in your ESLint config and let Prettier deal with the code style. For example, you can use [eslint-config-prettier](https://www.npmjs.com/package/eslint-config-prettier) instead of [eslint-config-airbnb-base](https://www.npmjs.com/package/eslint-config-airbnb-base).

W> Commit your code before running this command — it will reformat all your JavaScript files.

T> To make your contributors’ life easier you can set up Prettier to format code before each commit with lint-staged. The idea is covered in the *Automation* chapter.

### Setting Up Prettier

Let’s install Prettier:

```bash
npm install prettier --save-dev
```

Add a script to your *package.json* like this:

**package.json**

```json
{
  "scripts": {
    "format:js": "prettier --write"
  }
}
```

Create a config file, *.prettierrc*:

**.prettierrc**

```json
{
  "printWidth": 100,
  "singleQuote": true,
  "trailingComma": "es5"
}
```

And finally run:

```bash
npm run format:js
```

### Setting Up Prettier as ESLint Plugin

You can also run Prettier as a [ESLint plugin](https://github.com/prettier/eslint-plugin-prettier). This way Prettier formats all files that go through ESLint and you will not need to repeat glob patterns.

Let’s install Prettier and eslint-plugin-prettier, assuming you already have ESLint configured as described in the *Linting* chapter:

```bash
npm install prettier eslint-plugin-prettier --save-dev
```

Update your *.eslintrc* like this:

**.eslintrc**

```json
{
  "plugins": ["prettier"],
  "rules": {
    "prettier/prettier": ["error", {
      "printWidth": 100,
      "singleQuote": true,
      "trailingComma": "es5"
    }]
  }
}
```

T> You can also put your Prettier config into a *.prettierrc* file, see an example above.

And finally run:

```bash
npm run lint:js
```

When used like this, Prettier itself doesn't perform any alterations itself but instructs ESLint to implement its rules. ESLint will perform the fixing process itself.

T> You can set up your editor to run `eslint --fix` on save and it will reformat your code every time you save a file.

## Formatting CSS with Stylelint

Stylelint can format your CSS with `--fix` switch, check the *Linting* chapter to know how to set it up.

## Formatting CSS with Prettier

Prettier can format your CSS too, see how to set it up above.

For CSS you’ll need one more script in *package.json*:

**package.json**

```json
{
  "scripts": {
    "format:css": "prettier --write"
  }
}
```

Create a config file, *.prettierrc*:

**.prettierrc**

```json
{
  "printWidth": 100
}
```

And then run it like this:

```bash
npm run format:css
```

## Code Consistency

**Code consistency** can be characterized as follows:

* Does the code look similar everywhere?
* Are the programming patterns used consistent with each other?
* Is the naming consistent?

Code formatting answers the first problem. Linting can help with the second one although it might not capture it entirely. Consistency of naming is another difficult one as it's related to **conceptual code consistency**.

For example, it could have `FooLoader` and `BarThatLoadsFoo` abstractions. Both refer to the same concept in different ways.

It's difficult, or even impossible, to detect high-level problems like this automatically. For this reason, it's important to review the code for consistency every once in a while. Sometimes you may discover something that can be turned into a linting rule to solidify a specific idea but not everything can be automated.

## Conclusion

Formatting tools complement linting well. They eliminate one source of confusion and make sure your code is formatted in a consistent manner.

You'll learn about typing in the next chapter.

T> See the *Automation* chapter to learn how to automate code formatting.
