manuscript/code-quality/05-dependencies.md, before:

# Dependencies

## Keeping Dependencies Up to Date

An important part of maintaining a project is keeping their dependencies up to date. The hard part is to understand which updates won’t break your code and how to migrate to a new version otherwise. Ideally, dependencies have change logs with clear migration instructions and your project has a good test coverage.

Several tools can help you with updates:

* `yarn upgrade-interactive` allows you to choose which dependencies you want to update.
* [npm-upgrade](https://www.npmjs.com/package/npm-upgrade) also shows links to change logs.
* [updtr](https://www.npmjs.com/package/updtr) will try to run your tests for the latest version of each dependency and update your *package.json* only if they pass.
* [Greenkeeper](https://greenkeeper.io/) will send a pull request for every dependency update so you’ll know when it’s safe to update by the CI results.
* [David](https://david-dm.org/) gives you a *README* badge that will show status of your dependencies.
* `npm outdated --depth=0`

TODO: investigate https://www.npmjs.com/package/renovate, https://survivejs.com/blog/renovate-interview/

T> `npm ls`, and more specifically `npm ls <package name>`, allow you to figure out which versions you have installed. `npm ls -g` performs a similar lookup against the globally installed packages.

## Conclusion

TODO

Commit message:

chore: Add more info on dependency management

manuscript/code-quality/05-dependencies.md, after:

# Dependency Management

While writing projects, dependency management tends to be a common issue. Although lockfiles can help, you still have to keep up with the development as packages you depend upon evolve.

Sometimes this means you have to rewrite code. Bigger projects may provide **codemods** that can perform the required changes for you. They can also rely on deprecation patterns that tell you to rewrite certain pieces code before deprecating the functionality entirely.

## Keeping Dependencies Up to Date

An important part of maintaining a project is keeping their dependencies up to date. The hard part is to understand which updates won’t break your code and how to migrate to a new version otherwise. Ideally, dependencies have change logs with clear migration instructions and your project has a good test coverage as that will help in the process.

To understand which dependencies can be updated, run `npm outdated --depth=0`. You should get a result along this:

```bash
Package                 Current  Wanted  Latest  Location
catalog                   3.0.0   3.1.2   3.1.2  react-component-boilerplate
eslint-config-airbnb     15.1.0  15.1.0  16.0.0  react-component-boilerplate
eslint-plugin-jsx-a11y    5.1.1   5.1.1   6.0.2  react-component-boilerplate
```

The output tells that in this case running [npm update](https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/update) could update `catalog` to `3.1.2` given it follows SemVer. The other dependencies would require either a manual change to *package.json* or using a specific tool:

* `yarn upgrade-interactive` allows you to choose which dependencies you want to update.
* [npm-upgrade](https://www.npmjs.com/package/npm-upgrade) also shows links to change logs.
* [updtr](https://www.npmjs.com/package/updtr) will try to run your tests for the latest version of each dependency and update your *package.json* only if they pass.
* [Greenkeeper](https://greenkeeper.io/) will send a pull request for every dependency update so you’ll know when it’s safe to update by the CI results.
* [Renovate](https://www.npmjs.com/package/renovate) is an open source alternative to Greenkeeper. [Read Renovate interview](https://survivejs.com/blog/renovate-interview/) to learn more about the tool.
* [David](https://david-dm.org/) gives you a *README* badge that will show status of your dependencies.

T> `npm ls`, and more specifically `npm ls <package name>`, allow you to figure out which versions you have installed. `npm ls -g` performs a similar lookup against the globally installed packages.

## Conclusion

Managing dependencies is a necessary part of package maintenance. Especially having good tests in place helps in the process and makes upgrades less painful. If you make bigger changes, it can be a good idea to publish **pre-release** versions so that the users have a chance to test the upcoming code against their projects.
